How would you like a word like
LULLABY
SONG FESTIVAL
Wait... here comes an even better word:
ORIOLE
QUEENHARE
BREATHLESS
CONSTITUTION
LAPTOP
RIDGE ICE
ICE-EDGE
EDGELANDISH
CONVALLARIA
MANNAPUFF
ORIGINAL
BEAUTIFUL
PRIMEVAL
SPICYHERRING
SMOKESPARROW
SMOKESAUNA
SMOKEHAM
SMOKESAUSAGE
WILDWIND
WINDNEST
NESTTREE
HEADMATTER
WOODHEAD
Don't take it personally, just words...
You really can't go wrong with compound words
Compound words are magical because they combine
Our small Estonian nation also needs unity
In achieving this, our land and language play a crucial role
Estonian is a beautiful, rare
and unfortunately, fragile language
No nation whose language is restricted
can fully flourish
We've seen enough of that in dictatorships
Think about higher education, for example
Lately, there's been a lot of debate about whether
Estonian universities should have
programs in the Estonian language
because apparently, it won't make it in the world
But that's nonsense
The purpose of university education is... what do you do there?
The purpose of university education is to elevate
LINGUISTICAL
SCIENTIFICAL
and CULTURAL level
The Estonian language needs capability in every aspect of society,
in every field, everywhere
People who argue otherwise
are unintentionally, or even knowingly
destroying what
Estonian patriots have given their lives for
Do you understand... GIVEN THEIR LIVES FOR
In fact, in high school, elementary school,
primary school, daycare, even in the mother's womb,
the Estonian language should resonate,
because that's the only way
a person develops language skills,
flexibility to think big thoughts in their native language,
to make complex deals
Secondly, our country, Estonia, is one of the few
places where the forests and landscapes have remained
relatively intact as they were when the language developed
Our language is not separate from our forests
For example, you walk by a spring and hear,
how mosquitoes buzz and the creek gurgles
and your feet squish in the soft mud
What do you call what I just did?
When words audibly express nature
Onomatopoeia - very correct
There is no other language in the world
where it is as prevalent as in the Estonian language
Estonia's forests still have many places
where Estonians can truly contemplate
And the Estonian phrase GO TO THE FOREST
is actually a fantastic suggestion
And to let go of such a powerful natural heritage,
to sell it off - it's the same
destruction as anglicizing university education
If anyone still wants it explained in simple terms,
just take the Estonian constitution -
Article number 5 says that Estonian
natural resources are a national treasure,
to be used sustainably
Article number 6:
The official language of Estonia is Estonian
And if someone asks: what about minorities?
Take a world map and place it on the table
In the global context, Estonians are a minority
and everyone who comes here is part
of larger ethnic groups
And in this light, it's fair
for them to come here, learn the Estonian language,
get acquainted with Estonian culture
and it's a fair deal.